Hey everyone, my name is J.J. Allaire. I work at RStudio and I'm here today to talk about
a new scientific and technical publishing system called Quarto and then specifically
how Quarto can be used with Julia. So a little bit of a road map. I'll cover first what is
Quarto, where does it fit among other projects you might use or be aware of. Talk a little
bit about the concept of scientific markdown, which is an important thing that underpins
Quarto and its design philosophy. Talk a little bit about the different types of output you
can create with Quarto that includes different types of documents, but also websites, books,
presentations, blogs. So we'll kind of cover that and provide some examples of using Julia
with all of those formats. And then take a little more of a deep dive into Quarto and
how specifically it works with Julia and how some of the ins and outs of that, how some
of that can be made better, etc. So I'd start with the very basics, which is what specifically
is Quarto. You might actually be familiar with other systems that are similar to Quarto. I would
call it a literate programming system in the tradition of Org Mode or Sweave or in Julia you
may have seen Weave.jl, R Markdown, JupyterBook. Basically the fundamental idea is that we want to
create a scientific and technical publishing system that uses markdown and enhances it with
features that are required for scientific communication. So first and foremost of those
is the incorporation of computations into documents and publications. Again at the core
we're going to use markdown. Traditionally in scientific communication there's a substantial
tradition of using LaTeX and as you'll see the flavor of markdown that is used within Quarto
and within Pandoc borrows a lot from LaTeX and in fact is able to incorporate LaTeX directly.
And then we'll talk about the again as I said the different types of output that can be created.
So where did this project come from? It's an open source project. It's sponsored primarily
by RStudio and it actually comes out of about 10 years of experience with another system,
a similar system called R Markdown. That as I said that was actually announced 10 years ago
almost to the day here. And we worked on R Markdown for about 10 years and I developed a lot
of good sound core ideas and folks in the R community got a huge amount of value out of the
system. But as we're all aware the number of languages and runtimes and environments used
for scientific discourse is very broad. There's R, there's Julia, there's Python, there's Scala,
and there will be many more. And what we really wanted to do was take all of the experience you
had with R Markdown, build a new system kind of reimagined with the benefit of hindsight and make
that system fundamentally multi-language and multi-engine. So not tied to R in any way and
not tied to Python in any way or Julia in any way. It sort of is able to work with lots of
different languages and engines that are available now and in the future. And so I also before I
get into more of the mechanics and the how and the what I wanted to talk a little bit about the
goals of the project. One is this idea of computational documents and that is documents
that incorporate the source code required for their production directly inside the document.
And this can take the form of notebooks which we're all familiar with but also there are plain
text flavors of computational documents. The goal here is principally reproducibility. The
ability to replicate the studies and documents and analyses that we create. And also automation.
Automation leads to reproducibility but it's also a significant practical benefit to working this
way. So we want to provide a system that makes it easier than not to create computational documents.
We have this also this idea of scientific markdown and if I'm sure many or most of you are familiar
with preparing scientific manuscripts and you can see here if you try to use a tool like Microsoft
Word it might be relatively smooth going at the beginning but the requirements of technical
documents quickly escalate and make a tool like Word quite unwieldy. You may have used LaTeX which
starts out you can see the red line here at a higher bar of difficulty of use but it's a relatively
flat curve once you once you climb up to that bar. So LaTeX has been a great system for creating
technical documents but it is not the most accessible. Markdown is in some ways has some
similarities to LaTeX in that it's a plain text format that's sort of compiled or rendered to a
final document and it's not nearly as capable as LaTeX. It's easier to start with kind of approaching
as easy as using something like Word but then it it doesn't quite have the features and
functionality of LaTeX. So our goal here really is to take Markdown, hopefully take that line all
the way down to where Word starts, make it extremely easy to work with Markdown but then
have a system whose complexity scales a lot more like LaTeX. Once you learn the basics of it then
it's very straightforward to do sophisticated things. And another goal is is this idea of
single-source publishing. The content that we create oftentimes needs to go to multiple
variations of HTML, they may need to go to print, it may need to go to become a Word document or
presentation, EPUB books, there's lots of different ultimate locations that we need to deploy our
content to and we really like to write it one time. And that's what a system like Markdown or
an approach to publishing that is afforded by Markdown leads to. Okay so let's take a simple
concrete example of Cordo. This is a Markdown document, you can see on the top there's some
metadata which gives basic information, title, author, also points to a specific Jupyter
kernel to use, in this case Julia 1.7. And then you see some Markdown, you see a code block there,
an executable code block, it's got a little bit of Julia code in it, it's got some other metadata
in it, some options specifying a label and a caption. And this is a complete Cordo document
and what you can see on the bottom is we can render that document to a wide variety of
different formats. So let me show you a little bit of what that rendered content looks like. You can
see HTML is a web page, PDF you can kind of tell from the typography that this is something that
was produced by LaTeX, but that's a PDF variation of the same document produced from the same code.
You can see a Word version of the same document and then a PowerPoint slide produced from the
same code. So one set of code producing multiple formats. I want to dig a little bit more into
this code cell construct because if you're familiar with Markdown you've seen just a normal
tick-tick-tick Julia would be like I would like to include some Julia code for the reader. Those
braces around the Julia indicate this is an executable code block which means it's going to
be run when rendered. The code is executed and its output is included in the document. You can see
on the top there's some special comments that provide options, in this case echo false means
don't show the source code. And there's a whole bunch of different options I won't enumerate them
or recount them all here but as you can see from the slide lots of different ways to control how
output is handled from code cells. Talking a little in a little bit more depth about kind of
how the rendering pipeline works, there I was showing you a QMD file which is a Markdown text
file and it's essentially picked apart into a Julia code chunks and Markdown. The Julia code
chunks are executed using Jupyter and specifically iJulia. I'll talk a little bit more about that
soon. Turned into Markdown, sent to Pandoc and then that is used then to render into final output
formats. That's for the the scenario of a QMD file. You can also just take an IPy and B file
directly. So an IPy and B file, a Jupyter notebook with Julia of the Julia kernel and you can render
that directly to Markdown and onto Pandoc and then into all the various target output format. So let's
go through some examples of what this sort of scientific Markdown looks like in Cordo. You can
see this is some Markdown syntax that's citing things inside a work. Bibliographies can be
specified in lots of different formats including BibTeX and CSL. And you can see by when I use
that Markdown then the citations are resolved in the document. And when bibliographies are rendered
there's as you know many disciplines have many different variations and standards for how
citations and bibliographies are formatted. And there's a thing called the citation style
language that allows you to once you've got that bibliography output citations in actually over
10,000 different styles. So very robust support for citations. Also support for cross-references.
This is I want to reference a figure, I want to reference a subfigure, I want to reference a table,
an equation and I want to have those references automatically numbered and resolved in my
document rather than having to track them manually. So this is an example of you know
referencing a figure and a subfigure. Again we can do this for tables, equations, theorems,
sections. I can show you a little bit of what the syntax for that looks like in Markdown. Here I'm
defining a couple of figures with an HTML looking HTML ID and then I reference it here and you can
see then those references are automatically resolved. The same thing works for computations.
Here's an example of a Jupyter. I won't show that now but basically if you have a code cell that
produces a couple of plots you can say I'd like to be able to cross-reference those plots and
the numbering system will also work with computational outputs. Callouts are another
thing that are quite useful. Used very often in books that allow you to highlight specific
pieces of content different ways. And then if you're familiar with LaTeX, the LaTeX grid system,
there's quite a bit that can be done to do sophisticated layout of pages including the
use of one or both margins, kind of putting notes in the margin, putting content in the margins,
having figures or code span to use the full page while still maintaining an optimal reading width.
We have a lot of tools in Cordo for advanced page layout. This is an example of some of the
different kind of columns including full bleed, full width kind of treatments of things. We also
have lots of ways to use the margin so you can use the mark you can put content in the margin
but also something that's very popular here is putting an equation or side note or even foot
notes in the margin. So lots of tools for advanced page layout. And then finally we have integrated
support for embedding diagrams, either mermaid diagrams or graph viz diagrams. So this is an
example of a mermaid diagram, very helpful for a lot of technical publications. Let's talk a
little bit about output formats. Lots of different document formats. I've highlighted HTML, PDF,
and Word, but JATS, Context, RTF, ASCII doc, lots and lots. There's probably over 30 different formats
supported. Presentations, lots of different formats available for creating presentations.
Reveal.js does HTML presentations. We can create PowerPoint presentations, Beamer presentations as
well. Lots of advanced features in Reveal.js. Speaker notes, printing to PDF, animations. I'll give
an example here of a Julia presentation and they're taking advantage of Julia to do some
fancy diagrams. Just flick through here quickly. But this is a an HTML presentation created to talk
about a Julia package. Websites are another very useful type of content you can create. Here's an
example of a Julia workshop for data science. You can see a website with the kind of navigation
you'd expect. You can see you'd expect callouts, code blocks. So this is a website and you know
mostly all this navigation that is sort of provided automatically by the website framework.
Search is provided automatically. So very convenient way to publish collections of documents. And then
the Cordo website itself actually uses Cordo. As you can see here we've got hundreds of documents
that are easily navigable and also support search. So websites. Books are sort of in some
ways a variation of website. They inherit all the features of Cordo websites. So navigation, search,
etc. But they also support cross-references across chapters. So when you reference a figure from
chapter 2 and you're in chapter 5, it'll say figure 2.3. And it also supports print format. So
books support PDFs, Word documents, EPUBs, as well as essentially a website for your book. And here is
a book example created by Doug Bates about mixed-effects models with Julia. And you can see
here's examples of hiding and showing code. There are some cross-references in here. You can see
some citations, tables. And I don't see a download for it, but it would be again possible from the
same source to create a PDF of this book or an EPUB version of this book. So here's a cross-reference
there. So the books. And then blogs are another sort of another variation of websites that again
have just any old pages you want and can have arbitrary navigation and search. But also blogs
are collections of posts. And so we can automatically generate a listing, automatically
generate an RSS feed. Here's an example of a blog created for Julia. You can see here's a list of
posts. Okay, that you can see it's got its own kind of theme. I won't cover it in this talk, but
Quarto has lots and lots of different themes. And you as the publisher can create your own themes
or adapt themes that are created by others. So it's an example of a blog created with Quarto
and Julia. Okay, so let's talk more specifically about how Quarto and Julia can be used together,
how we actually execute Julia computations. What are some of the drawbacks and opportunities for
improvement? So if you want to use Quarto with Julia, first thing you need is you do need Jupyter
because we're going to use Jupyter to kind of manage execution and collect output from execution.
So you install Jupyter and then you install iJulia, the iJulia kernel. That's all that's
required. It's recommended, and I'll explain why in a minute, that you also add the revise package.
And so the basic workflow, and this really applies to Julia or Python or R or any engine that you
would use with Quarto, is to say Quarto render to render a document. I showed that earlier. You
can also render a notebook. So if you prefer to work in a notebook versus plain text, you can just
render the notebook directly. And then preview, I'll get into kind of Quarto tooling in a few
minutes, but preview lets you preview documents, and as you save them and work with them,
the preview is automatically updated. So that's a nice iterative workflow that you can use before
doing final rendering. So this is an example of that preview. So this is an example of, I've got
a Julia notebook in JupyterLab, and as I work with the notebook and save it, then the preview
on the right is automatically updated. All right, so let's talk a little bit about iJulia. If Quarto
sees a Julia code cell inside your document, it's automatically going to assume that it wants to use
the iJulia Jupyter kernel. It'll find the most recent version of the Julia kernel on your system,
but you can also pick a specific version by specifying in this example, for example,
Julia 1.7 directly. iJulia executes Julia code and then transforms it to either plain text,
graphics, markdown, HTML. It knows how to take Julia output and render it into something that
can then be published. One piece that I'll get into in a little more depth in a minute is that
for interactive sessions, we don't want to absorb the startup time of the kernel for every document
render, so Quarto will keep the Jupyter kernel resident to mitigate this, and then revise is
used to make sure that if there are changes to dependent files or packages that occur while that
long-running session exists, that they're updated and refreshed. I want to talk a little bit about
how we manage two types of performance. So one is startup performance, which is how long does it take
to load the interpreter and packages and how often I need to do that, and then rendering performance,
how expensive are computations and how frequently do we need to run them. Startup performance, I
talked about a little bit of this idea of keeping a kernel daemon around to mitigate startup costs.
That HelloQMD example from earlier takes about 30 seconds on first run on my machine,
but it takes less than a half a second on subsequent runs, so keeping that kernel around is
really valuable, but then that creates the problem of stale code, and that, again, the solution of
that is revise, which I'm sure most of you are familiar with for just long-running
REPL sessions, and you can add revise so that it always runs inside iJulia by adding this code.
This is all documented on the revise website, adding this code to the iJulia startup. So revise,
people have found to be a great addition to iJulia when working with Quarto. Thinking about
rendering performance, you know, and this has nothing to do with startup performance, this is just
how long do my computations take, and if I'm working iteratively on a document and focusing
on content, I don't always want to rerun on my computations, so there's a few approaches to that.
One is just authoring inside a notebook allows you to control exactly when code execution occurs and
actually cache the results in the notebook, so that's one approach. Jupyter Cache, which is a
package you can install separately, will actually do caching of all your cell outputs. It's all or
nothing, so if any of your code changes it's got to re-execute the whole document, but again,
if you've done your computations and now you're writing and doing analysis, this allows you to
re-render with zero computations. And then I won't get into all the mechanics of it, but Quarto has
a freeze feature that allows you to also, separate from cache, it's a little more explicit and
durable, you can permanently save and reuse computational output. So for example, a blog post
that you wrote three years ago, you don't want to have to keep re-rendering that, and so that
can be saved. Or if you're deploying code to a server that may or may not have the permissions
and software required to render, you may want to render everything locally, have it freeze,
and then deploy the kind of frozen execution results onto the server. We picked iJulia mostly
because we had made a bunch of investments to make the working of Quarto and Jupyter
to work really well. One was this kernel demonization and caching work. iJulia
also had implemented a lot of primitives for supporting MIME outputs from Julia results,
and that's including the ability to output raw LaTeX, which ends up being important for some
more sophisticated tables, and the fact that as a format, IPyMB was supported in a bunch of
popular notebook front ends, JupyterLab, VS Code, etc. So I think it aligned well with a lot of
infrastructure that both we had and that users were taking advantage of. But it's definitely
conceivable that the other notebook or literate programming systems like Pluto or Neptune,
they could be integrated as an alternative to iJulia. So that's something we'd
certainly be interested in talking about. The execution engine system is intended for future
extensions, and it's pluggable. So it's something that we could definitely do.
A little bit about tools. We have a VS Code extension for Quarto, which I won't go into
exhaustive detail about all the different features, but it's a pretty deep feature-wise.
Specifically as regards to Julia, it integrates with the Julia VS Code extension. So here I've
got a Julia QMD document, and I'm doing side-by-side render and preview.
Here I'm actually able to run. You can see run cell. I can run individual cells in the QMD,
and their results are put in the interactive Julia session that's running in the terminal,
as well as plots displayed. And then we also integrate with the Julia VS Code extension for
code completion. So lots of good productivity tools available if you're a VS Code user.
As I showed before, we also integrate pretty well with JupyterLab. You can run Quarto preview on a
notebook, launch it in JupyterLab, and as you're working with it and you save it,
there's a browser preview of it that refreshes automatically.
You can also use Quarto preview specifically with any text editor. Just type Quarto preview
Julia.QMD or Julia.ipynb from any terminal, and you'll get live reloading from whatever editor
you're in, and there's actually some Quarto extensions available for popular editors,
some of which we maintain, some of which others maintain. So EmacsVim, NeoVim. I'll make the link
to these slides available at the end of the talk, so you can find those links if you need to.
And that is, in fact, the end of the talk, and there is the link to the slides.
We've got the Quarto website, specifically the Quarto and Julia article you can see linked to
there. Repeats a lot of the Quarto and Julia section, so if that went a little bit fast,
that breaks it down in much more detail and has more step-by-step instructions.
The Getting Started gives you a tutorial that walks you through the basics of how to use the system,
and we'd love to hear from folks in our discussions or GitHub issues, so I'd
also love to hear any questions that people have now. Thank you.